Liberation Upon Hearing

An Explanation of the Phenomena of the Intermediate State

by Minling Terchen Gyurme Dorje

Oṃ svasti.In devotion I bow to the one whose compassionate sunlightDispels the darkness of fear
and who guides beingsAlong the great pathway that leads to liberation.Here I shall briefly
explain the phenomena of the bardo.

Here, you can practise on the basis of any maṇḍala ritual that protects those beings caught
in the noose of the Lord of Death from the terrors of the lower realms. When extending such
practices with a related explanation of the phenomena of the bardos, do so with a motivation
of boundless great compassion for all beings in general and especially for all beings
of this world headed by your particular objects of focus. Make the necessary time available
and recite the following words of the text slowly:

Kye! Son or daughter of noble family, you, the one named [insert name], who have died, do not
be distracted! Listen and keep this in mind. It is the general nature of all conditioned
phenomena to be impermanent and subject to change. And it is taught that the nature of beings’
lives in particular is that they lack even so much as a moment’s permanence. For you,
the time has now come: your life is spent. You are in the intermediate state. Hold to these
key points of profound instruction, and until this ritual introduction is complete maintain
a natural state of awareness and, with the support of this name-card (ming byang), be
at ease.

It is vitally important that you recognise the bardo as the bardo and set your intention towards
the genuine path.

There now follows 1) a general teaching on the intermediate state and 2) an explanation of particular
phases.

1. General Teaching

This has four parts: 1) The essence of the bardo; 2) the literal meaning of the term; 3) its
divisions; and 4) specific practices for each.

1. Essence

All experiences other than the primordially pure space of the ground are intermediate states.
The experience in which ground-appearances dawn as wisdom is the pure bardo of dharmatā,
while all the phenomena of delusory appearance that comprise the six realms of beings constitute
the impure bardo of delusion. Thus, bardo refers to the mental states together with
their seeds that have arisen from the primordially pure space and continue until they are
exhausted within that space that is the basis for their arising.

2. Literal Meaning

The term bardo refers to an interim between what comes before and what follows. In the case
of the first two bardos, this means the interim that has been initiated by an earlier life
and precedes the formation of the next life. In the case of the latter two, it is as said
in the Treasury [of Abhidharma]:

Here, between death and birthThere arises intermediate existenceSince the destination is not
yet reached,It is the interim phase of becoming.

As this indicates, the period when someone has died before they take up their subsequent rebirth
is the intermediate state of existence.

3. Divisions

The Unimpeded Sound says:

When divided, there are four, of which…

Thus, there are four: 1) the bardo of birth and death or natural bardo; 2) the bardo of dying;
3) the dharmatā bardo; and 4) the bardo of becoming. The first begins with birth from the
mother’s womb and continues until succumbing to a fatal condition or injury. The second
begins with the approach of death and continues until breathing ceases. The third begins
with the cessation of inner respiration and continues until the dissolution of the visions
of spontaneous presence. The fourth begins with the dissolution of the visions of spontaneous
presence and continues until the occurrence of a subsequent birth.

4. Specific Practices

Each of the following explanations consists of an analogy and its meaning.

The analogy for eliminating misconceptions in the bardo of this life is a falcon[1] entering
its nest. The meaning is that one must eliminate misconceptions by following a noble guru
and applying oneself assiduously to studying, reflecting upon and meditating upon the instructions
that he or she gives.

Similarly, the analogy for clear recollection (gsal gdab pa) in the bardo of dying is a beautiful
girl staring into a mirror. As this suggests, one must clearly bring to mind instructions
that are familiar from the past.

Trusting that appearances are mind’s own manifestation during the bardo of dharmatā is likened
to a child entering its mother’s lap. By mastering the meaning of the instructions, no
matter what appearances of dharmatā may arise, one must not react to them with fear but maintain
confidence that they are the naturally manifesting display of one’s own wisdom.

Extending one’s karmic fortune in the bardo of becoming is likened to mending a broken irrigation
channel by adding a spout. No matter how terrifying the deluded appearances might be,
one sets out on the path to a pure rebirth based on the key points of the instructions with
which one is already familiar, or which are explained at the time (such as is happening
now).

It is taught that according to varying levels of capacity, there are thus three possible stages
of liberation.

2. Particular Phases

What follows refers primarily to the three later bardos.

1. The Bardo of Dying

At the time of transferring from life at death, the body’s water, fire and wind elements are
disturbed and it can no longer support heat or consciousness. This marks the severing of
one’s vital force. The aggregates, elements and sense-sources, together with their objects,
all gradually fade. But, to emphasize what is most important, this is spoken of as the dissolution
of the elements, because whenever a support dissolves whatever relies upon it will
certainly dissolve as well.

Wisdom Display says:

First earth dissolves into water,Water then dissolves into fire.Fire dissolves into wind,And
wind then dissolves into consciousness.That very consciousness thenEnters into clear light.


Thus, when earth dissolves into water the body’s strength deteriorates. (Note: this does not
mean that physical strength deteriorates once earth has finished dissolving into water, but
that the process begins from the initial moment of dissolution and the arising of outer,
inner and secret signs.)[2] As water dissolves into fire, the mouth and nostrils dry up.
As fire dissolves into wind, the body loses heat beginning from the extremities. As wind
dissolves into consciousness, the flow of coarse breathing is cut. As consciousness dissolves
into space, all the coming and goings of energy-mind cease. As space dissolves into luminosity,
the consciousnesses of the five sense doors and all processes of thought fade into
absolute space. Then all the subtle essences of the left and right channels dissolve into
the A and HAṂ at the upper and lower ends of the central channel.

The white essences at the upper end of the channel descend. When they reach the heart centre
the whole of one’s experience becomes totally white like the risen moon. This is known as
the experience of appearance because the natural glow of cognizance is clearly apparent.
The thirty-three thought-states that derive from anger, such as freedom from passion, and
coarse percept-thoughts (gzung rtog) cease. This is the first moment, known as empty luminosity.

Red essences at the lower ends of the channel ascend, and the whole of one’s experience becomes
totally red like the risen sun. Mind appears extremely clear, so this is known as the
experience of increased luminescence. The forty thought-states that derive from desire, such
as attachment, and coarse perceiver-thoughts ('dzin rtog) cease. This is the second moment,
known as extremely empty luminosity.

As the white and red essences meet at the heart the wind-energies in the vital channel cease,
and the whole of one’s experiences becomes totally black like dense darkness. This is known
as the experience of the attainment of experience at the approach to mind's cessation.
The seven thought-states that derive from vacuity, such as lack of clarity, and extremely
subtle conceptualization cease. This is the third moment, known as the luminosity of great
emptiness.

Then, as the A HAṂ at the heart dissolves completely, the whole of one’s experience arises as
luminosity without centre or periphery, like a cloudless sky. This is known as the experience
of full attainment wherein mind is free from any stain. The three experiences cease.
This is the fourth moment, known as the luminosity of universal emptiness.

At that time, what manifests is the great indestructible nature that beings have always possessed
from the very beginning, the dharmakāya of primordial purity, referred to as primordially
pure original liberation. On top of this ground luminosity which beings have always
had as their nature, that clear light which the sublime guru introduced in the past and with
which one has become familiar also manifests, so that mother and child meet. By remaining
in that non-conceptual state of clear light, which is the profound and crucial point, there
can be what is called ‘awakening as clear light dharmakāya at death,’ just as in the
saying, “In an instant complete enlightenment.” This is the attainment of liberation in the
bardo of primordially pure dharmakāya.

The sequence in which all this arises is as follows. The clear light of the supporting aggregates,
elements and sensory sources, together with the supported, merges with the clear light
of the support and supported for the three of appearance, increase and attainment. At
full attainment the all-ground, too, enters the space of the great luminosity of union. Then
there manifests the level of the great bliss dharmakāya in which absolute space and pure
awareness are indivisible. This very luminosity arises for everyone at the time of death,
but for those who lack the instructions on prior familiarisation it arises for no longer
than a single instant, and they therefore fail to recognise it.

[Note: In the context of the stages of dissolution explained above, the reference to earth dissolving
into water does not mean that the earth areas of the body become devoid of earth
element or that they switch places and a coarse earth-element dissolves into the water-element.
Rather, it means that through the strength of wind-energy in the central channel the
karmic wind associated with the earth element is overcome. Then, as there is no longer any
support, the supported cannot continue, so the subtly appearing consciousness, which, remains
in the central channel according to one’s habitual tendencies, ceases. Then the body’s
elements of solidity such as the bones lose their supporting wind-energy and consciousness.
Thus, the subtle essence of earth dissolves into the subtle essence of water. A similar
principle applies to the dissolution of water into fire and fire into wind. Wind dissolving
into consciousness does not mean that it leaves the domain of the physical body or that
it transfers and enters the path of consciousness. Nor does it mean that the habitual
tendencies of wind’s subtle essence settle in consciousness and then wind ceases. Rather,
the subtle essence of wind disappears from everywhere in the body, including the coarse vital
channel, and merges indivisibly — as a single taste — with the bindu that combines the
five pure essences inside the vital channel. Consciousness dissolving into space does not
mean that it ceases to be an entity, but that since it is clear and unobstructed like space,
it enters the central channel in a way that is difficult to illustrate.][3]

2. The Bardo of Dharmatā

This is the time when luminosity dissolves into union. As explained above, there is an experience
of luminosity and emptiness at the end of the fourth moment. Within this there is full
attainment of experience. Then, out of that comes the increase of experience and out of
that, appearance. Then, in an instant, from this threefold experience and its accompanying
wind-energy, through the proximate cause of the appearance of clear light there arises an
extremely subtle form, clear and unobstructed, like a reflection in a mirror or rainbow
light in the sky. This is the dawning of saṃbhogakāya.

Here, the five original and indestructible aggregates are what is pervaded, and that which pervades
them is the maṇḍala of the five buddha families, based on the crucial fact that these
buddha families, their forms and pure realms are innately present. These maṇḍala gatherings
fill the whole of space. On the first day, the maṇḍala of Vairocana arises out of blue
light, which is like a cloudless autumn sky. Similiarly, on the following four days, the
other sets of maṇḍala gathering arise on a boundless scale — Akṣobhya from white light,
Ratnasambhava from yellow light, Amitābha from red light and Amoghasiddhi from green light,
all of them together with male and female bodhisattvas and gatekeepers — making five sets
in total.

All arise spontaneously out of the radiance in one’s own heart, so they are maṇḍalas of the
vajra space of Akaniṣṭha appearing at this time. The instruction related to this phase is
called the crucial point of understanding engagement.

The crucial point of awareness engaging with light is to direct subtle clear rays of five-coloured
light from your heart to strike the hearts of the maṇḍala gathering and then to rest
in an experience of clarity and emptiness.

Then, when the gatherings are drawn back and dissolved into your heart centre, to settle in
an experience of awareness and emptiness in which whatever naturally arises is naturally liberated
is the crucial point of light engaging with awareness.

If you lack confidence in this, then union will dissolve into wisdom. From your heart emerges
the light of fourfold wisdom — blankets of blue, white, yellow and red light — into the
space above. On top of each are clear light-spheres (thig le) of matching colours, all of
them ornamented with five lesser spheres of light. Above, a dome of light appears like a peacock’s
tail fan.

At this time, the crucial point of the body is that the aggregates are freed from self-clinging,
so the body remains in the actual face of luminous dharmatā, and, since it is without
elements and subtle afflictions, to recognise this as one's own projection.

Following this, there is the stage of wisdom dissolving into spontaneous presence. The wisdom
visions are absorbed into the dome of light above. Then, out of primordially pure appearance,
which is like a cloudless sky, all the infinite appearances of the pure peaceful and
wrathful realms and the impure six classes of beings, arise in a moment. At this stage, to
attain liberation through eliminating misconceptions concerning self-manifestation is the
crucial point of recognising the ultimate.

On this occasion, awakening in primordial absolute space occurs on the basis of the eight modes
of arising of the visions, the six sets of six of higher perceptions, such as the faculties,
the three sets of three higher perceptions of the three kāyas and the six recollections,
and by means of the eight modes of dissolution with confidence in spontaneous presence.


Regarding the determinacy of days in the dharmatā bardo, one meditation day is the time one
can remain in an experience of clear light. For someone who has previously trained in meditation
such days will therefore arise for a long while, and liberation will come through recognition
at that time. For someone without familiarity, however, this will be unstable and
only last a moment. There will be no recognition, only continuing to the next bardo.

3. The Bardo of Becoming

For beginners the earlier visions of luminous dharmatā fade away unrecognised. Then, in the
next moment, habitual tendencies for the following stage are triggered by various activating
conditions. Wind-energy, mind and the four subtle elements serve as causes and conditions
through which the subtle and unobstructed bardo form is created. The duration of this bardo
is seven days, where one day is equivalent to a human day. Then, if one has still not
found the support of another body, one dies again and lives for another seven days. This
process of repeated birth and death every seven days continues for a maximum of forty-nine
days in total, within which one will find the conditions for rebirth.

For the first half of the seven weeks you retain your appearance from the previous life and
then from the halfway point onwards you take on an appearance based on your next life. You
might think that during the bardo you would certainly have the appearance of the next life
alone. This is possibly how it is in reality, but that would not involve a contradiction,
because the clinging to an earlier appearance would be based on habitual tendencies familiar
from the past. All relative appearances are determined by the deluded mind.

Therefore, to be shaken by some terrifying experience can inspire a recognition of your future
appearance. Moreover, all six sensory powers are complete here, so you can experience the
sensory objects of common karmic perception. You also have miraculous powers that enable
you to travel anywhere — except the site of your future rebirth — unimpededly, meaning that
you can even pass through solid objects like mountains or walls.[4] Your faculties are
sharp and your presence of mind clear. All those are of the same type within the bardo can
see one other with divine sight but are invisible to others.

Generally, it is said that once the bardo connected to a future birth has been determined there
is no turning back. Still, in certain special circumstances, it is as the Abhidharmasamuccaya
says: “… in which case this is avoided.”[5] Thus, it is possible to transform the
situation through the power of virtue. Furthermore, although it is said that scents, which
could be good or bad, provide basic sustenance, you can also receive whatever is dedicated
through special rituals.

The bardo that possesses these characteristics also features various signs: the four paths of
beings, three terrifying abysses, four dreadful sounds, five definite signs, six uncertainties,
and so on:

Four Paths of Beings

An area may feature a path of white light that leads to the realms of devas and asuras; a black
path that leads to the hells; a red path that leads to the preta realm; or a yellow path
that leads to the human and animal realms. Moreover, to move along with the head turned
down is a feature of the bardo leading to lower realms; moving along with the head turned
up is a feature of the bardo leading to the deva realms; and moving straight ahead is a feature
of the bardo leading to the human realm.

Three Terrifying Abysses

Similarly, there are three vast abysses — deep red, ashen grey and dark black, all unbearable
to behold — which appear through karmic vision based on the three poisons, and which, when
seen, indicate impending descent into the three lower realms.

Four Dreadful Sounds

As the wind-energies[6] of the four elements and thoughts slip into ordinary patterns, the wind-energies
of the four subtle elements re-emerge producing four dreadful sounds that cause
unbearable pain: sounds of earthquakes and avalanches; of torrential rivers and crashing
waves; of blazing forest fires; and of fierce hurricane winds.

Five Definite Signs

The definite signs are as follows: 1) whereas in the past you would be obstructed by even the
slightest physical barrier, now you are able to pass unhindered through mountains and walls;
2) whereas in the past others would see your physical gestures and hear your utterances,
now these go unseen and unheard; 3) in the past you would leave footprints and cast a
shadow but not any longer; 4) in the past you had no heightened powers of perception, but
now various subtle forms of higher perception arise. These are all signs of having no tangible
body. 5) Internally, since you lack the white and red elements, you no longer see the
sun, moon, planets or stars, but instead behold darkness.

Six Uncertainties

As for the uncertainties, 1) your dwelling place, which could be an empty house, or a cavern
and the like, is uncertain; 2) your companions could be devas, pretas, or spirits and demons
and so on, and are thus uncertain; 3) your food and clothing, which could manifest as
the various forms of food and clothing of the six realms, all difficult to obtain, are uncertain;
4) your resting place, which could be a bed of straw[7] or the corner of a bridge,[8]
is uncertain; 5) your behaviour, which could take on any form in an instant, is uncertain;
and 6) feelings of pleasure and pain, which are varied and liable to fluctuate without
reason, are uncertain as well.

Thus, you are flung across chasms repeatedly like a feather cast about in the wind. Or else
your surroundings are entirely shrouded in heavy darkness; you are tormented by wild and vicious
beasts; and led along by the servants of Yama, lord of death, while pursued by terrible
sounds of violence and slaughter. Your virtues and misdeeds are judged with an array
of white and black pebbles. You are beset by fierce blizzards of sleet and snow or assailed
by showers of assorted weapons. You might see your past home and close family as if in a
dream and wander off in search of them. When approaching and calling out, they neither see
nor hear you, and therefore do not reply.[9] When seeing their mourning and cries of distress,
you understand that you have died. With nowhere left to go, you feel unbearable sorrow.
Seeing others carelessly abuse your possessions you feel intense attachment and anger.
Such confused, terrifying experiences will arise on an unfathomable scale, but since they
are but the delusory appearances of the bardo you must recognise them as such.

Moreover, any initiative based on your former place of residence is now finished; your connection
to close family and friends has been cut; the karma to use accumulated belongings is
exhausted; and all your past experiences are now no more than the basis for habitual traces.
As these inconceivable bardo appearances dawn they arise only due to the deluded perceptions
of your own mind. Aside from this, they lack even the slightest speck of true reality.
As the Bodhicaryāvatāra says:

Who created this burning iron ground?From where have all these fires come?[10]These and all
such similar tormentsAre born of a wicked mind, the Sage has said.[11]

Understand that it is just so. Avoid attachment and aversion towards the appearances of friends
and enemies, sensual delights that produce pleasure or unpleasant things that cause suffering.
Without evaluating them as to what should be taken up or avoided, develop a single-pointed
focus and confident trust in the illusory, unreal nature of all phenomena.

It is easy to change support within the bardo. Consciousness is clear, so if you accumulate
karma based on attachment or aversion this can stimulate negative karma from your past and
cast you down into the lower realms; whereas if you generate a virtuous mind of faith, compassion
and so on this can reinvigorate any virtuous karma from the past. To put it simply,
to be deluded can have serious consequences, and even a minor thought of attachment or
aversion can cast you into the lower realms, while training in the path is also highly consequential.
Here your training can progress more in a single moment than it did in the course
of months and years while you were alive. So, avoid falling prey to afflictive emotions
and meditate on the profound path. Through this, in the best case, you will be liberated
in that very moment, and at the very least, you will proceed to the higher realms — of this
there is no doubt.

Should you fail to seize this opportunity, you will have to be reborn. In which case, seeing
an image of your parents having intercourse is a sign of impending womb-birth or birth from
an egg. An attraction to scents is a sign of birth through heat and moisture, while attraction
to place is a sign of miraculous birth. More particularly, avoid becoming attached
to warmth when trying to avoid the cold of the rain and wind, and avoid a desire for cold
when afflicted by the heat of fires and so on, because these would only lead you to the hot
and cold hells. Similarly, should you appear as a woman avoid feeling passionate attachment
toward men, or if appearing as a man avoid feeling passionate attachment toward women
— and, in both cases, avoid hostility toward their counterparts. Unite all potential objects
of attachment and aversion, such as delusory perceptions and terrifying appearances, with
illusoriness and emptiness. Allow awareness to hold its place and relax deeply without
grasping. Through this, all deluded perception will be naturally liberated upon arising.


In short, allow all visual forms to arise naturally as the infinitely pure maṇḍala of the guru
and yidam deities. Allow all sounds to reverberate naturally as the dharmatā’s own natural
resonance, indestructible sound and emptiness. And recognise all thoughts as the display
of primordially pure dharmakāya. No matter what occurs — be it happiness or sorrow, good
or bad — generate fervent, one-pointed devotion for the sources of refuge by thinking, “Precious
Three Jewels, know and care for me!”

Concentrate as well, with singular focus, on generating an excellent motivation. Think: “I shall
take on a pure body complete with all freedoms and opportunities, so that I may accomplish
vast waves of beneficial activity for the teachings and all sentient beings!” Visualize
the parents to whom you will be reborn as the guru inseparable from the yidam deity, together
with the consort. Enter their forms with powerful focus. Rest evenly in emptiness
beyond conceptual elaboration and train as much as you can with pure perception.

In short, those you have left behind will make offerings to the Three Jewels on your behalf.
They will give charity to people in need, recite profound sūtras, and perform offering practices
connected to the maṇḍalas of various texts from the tantra collections. They will
thus carry out powerful virtuous acts on a vast scale that will benefit you enormously, so
do not worry. We now, in particular, are carrying out this offering practice in relation
to the great maṇḍala of [insert name here]. Since this special ritual practice for purifying
the lower realms will serve you greatly, consider that that the maṇḍala of the transcendent,
accomplished lord [insert name of deity] is actually present here. And taking your place
before it, generate faith in the guru and Three Jewels, compassion for sentient beings
who are infinite in number, and regret for your past misdeeds, as well as a commitment not
to repeat them. Motivated by the intense wish that you and all others may attain enlightenment,
perform prostrations as a physical act; verbally recite prayers and the verses for
taking refuge; and mentally carry out the stages of the practice, without error, by receiving
empowerment and so on, as you allow your mind to follow the words of the text. Doing
so will be enormously beneficial for you.

This is the clear reminder.

For those whose lives and merit, engendered by past virtues, have ended,And who are led by terrifying
Yama to the citadel of the other side,All those who are worn out and who lack protection,Here
is an entry to the method of guidance through loving kindness.Based on what
the protector, embodiment of boundless compassion,Taught in all the sūtras and tantras, and
especiallyThose simple supplements to rituals for guiding the deceased —From all such presentations
of the bardo states,Pure works that gather together the essential details,This
is a quintessential summary — may it guide all beings!

This essential introduction to the bardos entitled ‘Liberation Upon Hearing’ was requested by
Lama Shakya Özer from Ngenlung Sang-ngak Chöling in the Mön district and composed in the
palace of secret mantra next to the great temple of glorious Tradruk by the upāsaka follower
of Śākyamuni, the awareness-holder Gyurme Dorje, who combined without contradiction the
intent of general works and those specifically dedicated to the bardos. May virtue and goodness
abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019. With many thanks to Sean Price for his suggestions.