The Root Verses on the Six Bardos
from the terma of Karma Lingpa

kyé ma,  dak la kyé né bar do char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of this life is dawning upon me,
tsé la long mé lelo pang ché né
I will abandon laziness for which life has no time,
tö sam gom sum ma yeng lam la juk
Enter, undistracted, the path of study, reflection and meditation,
nang sem lam long ku sum ngön gyur cha
Making perceptions and mind the path, and realize the three kāyas;
mi lü len chik tobpé dü tsö dir
Now that for once I have attained a human body,
yeng ma lam la döpé dü tsö min
This is not the time to remain in the ways of distraction.

kye ma,  dak la milam bardo char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of dreams is dawning upon me,
timuk ro nyel bakmé pang ché né
I will abandon the heedless, corpse-like sleep of ignorance,
drenpa yeng mé neluk ngang la jok
And settle the mind in its natural state without distraction;
milam zung né trül gyur ösel jang
Recognizing dreams, I will train in transformation and clear light,
düdro shyin du nyelwar ma ché chik
I must not simply slumber like an animal,
nyi dang ngönsum drepé nyamlen ché
But combine sleep with realization—this is crucial.

kye ma,  dak la samten bardo char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of samādhi is dawning upon me,
nam yeng trülpé tsok nam pang ché né
I will abandon all forms of distraction and delusion,
yeng mé dzin mé tadrel ngang la jok
And rest in the infinite state that is free of distraction and grasping;
kyé dzok nyi la tenpa tobpar cha
Gaining stability in the two stages: generation and perfection,
chawa pang né tsé chik gom dü dir
At this time of single-pointed meditation, having given up activity,
nyön mong trülpé wang du ma tang shyik
I must not fall under the sway of afflictions and delusion.

kye ma,  dak la chikha bardo char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of dying is dawning upon me,
kun la chak sem shyen dzin pang ché né
I will abandon all grasping, yearning, and attachment,
dam ngak salwé ngang la ma yeng juk
Enter, undistracted, a state in which the instructions are clear,
rang rik kyé mé namkhé ying su po
And transfer my own awareness into the sphere of unborn space;
düché sha trak lü dang dral la khé
As I am about to leave this compound body of flesh and blood,
mi tak gyuma yinpar shepar cha
I will know it to be a transitory illusion.

kye ma,  dak la chönyi bardo char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of dharmatā is dawning upon me,
kun la ngang trak jik nang pang ché né
I will abandon all fear and terror,
gang shar rang nang rigpar ngo shé juk
Recognizing whatever appears as the natural display of awareness,
bardö nang tsul yinpar shepar cha
I will know it to be the way this bardo unfolds;
dön chen gak la tukpé dü shik ong
Now that I have reached this momentous, crucial point,
rang nang shyi trö tsok la ma jik shik
I will not fear these natural manifestations, the peaceful and wrathful deities.

kye ma,  dak la sipa bardo char dü dir
Kyema! Now when the bardo of becoming is dawning upon me,
dünpa tsé chik sem la zung ché né
I will concentrate my mind with single-pointed determination,
zang po lé kyi tro la nen gyi tü
Strive to prolong the results of good karma,
ngal go gak né ru lok drenpar cha
Close the entrance to rebirth, and try to keep from being reborn.
nying rü dak nang göpé dü shik yin
This is the time when perseverance and pure perception are required;
mikser pong la lama yabyum gom
Abandon jealousy, and meditate on the master and consort.

chiwa ong nyom mepé lo ringpo
With mind far off and no thought of impending death,
dön mé tsé di chawa drup drup né
Performing the meaningless activities of this life,
daré tong lok ché na shintu trül
To return empty-handed now would be utterly deluded;
gö ngo shepa dampé lha chö yin
Recognize what is needed: the sacred Dharma,
data nyi du lha chö mi ché dam
Why not practise it now, at this very moment?
drupchen lamé shyal né di ké sung
The great accomplished gurus have said:
lamé damngak sem la ma shyak na
If you do not keep in mind your master's instructions
rang gi rang nyi luwar mi gyur ram
Are you not deceiving yourself?

May these root verses of Liberation Upon Hearing in the Bardo remain until saṃsāra itself is
emptied.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2016, with reference to earlier versions, especially that of Chögyam
Trungpa Rinpoche and Francesca Freemantle.

Version: 1.2-20211209